you
all right so I'm in my shelter right now
and things are going good yesterday and
it started really coming down with the
rain last night and I crawled in here
and stayed warm and dry throughout the
night even though it was coming down
it's a little later in the morning and
the rains finally let up and so this has
been a great shelter unfortunately I
can't get the project's done that I need
to get done while sitting in this tight
shelter so today's projects going to be
to build an overhang so I can sit
outside keep my fire going
we've cordage make traps even in a
downpour I need to get more work done
and can't spend 12 hours sitting in my
debris Hut every day so what I'm doing
is building a little patio here I've got
two steaks buried into the ground that
are why sticks holding up the main beam
I'm just going to make a quick a frame
roof and then I'm going to go around to
the trees around here which are
amazingly good because they have a ton
of rotten bark on them that peels off in
large enough sheets that I can haul it
back to the camp lean it up on here and
make myself a dry shelter all right so I
was able to just peel up a long strip
and now what I can do is just work my
fingers into this bark it's actually
pretty you know rotten it's enough to
hold together but it's rotten enough to
come off the log so you can see I want
to get this in as big of a strip as
possible so I'm just going to work my
hands in times if I work the other side
at the same time she's gonna pound a
break eventually I'm gonna do my best
and not let it break because everywhere
it breaks is a spot where rainwater
might drip in or a spot that I have to
double up and therefore get my new bark
this isn't too bad I just got to handle
it gently get it back to my camp
but you know ten of those and I'm going
to have a really nice patio
all right first thing I need to do on my
a-frame is tie straight sticks with
hickory bar cord to support the bark
panels
you
when it pokes up the top I just kind of
gently break it so now it's going to
hold its going to shield over the top
and hold the bark from sliding down all
right so this is about where it's going
to be I don't want to waste too much
time doing this this thing is obviously
not a waste of time but the second it's
done and I'm going to serve its purpose
I need to stop and work on something
else clock is ticking I need to get out
there and get my traps going alright so
what I've done is charcoal Dover my
hands I've already washed them rub them
in dirt and now I'm putting on charcoal
to mask any scent that I have before I
really touch any of this trap this is
called a Paiute trap it's a really good
deadfall this is the one I have the most
success with I'm going to play with a
snare as well but probably set about 10
of these while I'm out here because when
you set one you don't get one you set
ten and you get one generally if you're
a better trapper maybe five to one but
you're never always going to spring
every trap so I'm going to run a
trapline with a couple different traps
but the Paiute trap is going to be the
go-to probably 80% of the traps I set
will beep hi you for now those sun's
going down so I'm going to sneak this
one in here and hope it works I've got
the three pieces to the Paiute where I
have my upright my diagonal stick it's
got a little toggle attached to it now
the string is attached to a toggle which
goes around the front loops around and
clips in and that's held in place by the
bait stick now you'll notice I have a
piece of bone for the toggle and it's
really good in areas like this where
it's wet out if you have wood against
wood it tends to really bind together so
if you're in a really wet area use bone
and you can even have bone on bone and
it's going to be a better trigger
mechanism a lot more sensitive than wood
against wood so here we go
I'm gonna set this up hopefully the
squirrels aren't watching i roasted and
put acorn into my bait stick so I split
it in half and jammed a bunch of roasted
acorn in there now that the squirrels
really are going for the acorn out here
I need to differentiate what I'm putting
in this versus what they're getting so
by roasting it it actually releases some
of the oils gives it more of a smell and
draws them to it so I lift this rock
make sure it's nice and balanced I found
a good balancing point hopefully it's a
good flat rock you don't have to go too
heavy this one is just about as heavy as
I would ever go with my rock if you do
way too heavy of a rock one you smush
the animal but two it makes the trap
less sensitive you know the lighter
weight the more sensitive you can set
the trap without having going off during
the night or having the sticks bind
together because there's so much weight
on it so this stick here has got some
ground acorn in a split in it so that
squirrel really has to work to get out
it I've definitely had numerous animals
come and chew to bait off my trap so I
make sure to do a really good job
getting the bait in there and now the
tip of the stick is going to hit the tip
of the toggle I'm going to slowly
release the weight make sure everything
looks balanced and then I wait around
for about five minutes and make sure
that this thing is solid that is really
up and doesn't spring because a lot of
times they just tend to spring a couple
minutes after you set them all right so
I've got my stinging nettle in here with
the red clover onions and cattail I'm
really stoked on that meal I definitely
want to cook the cattail and the
stinging nettle absolutely singing
Natalie get rid of the stingers and so
to cook the veggies what I've been doing
is just putting them in this pot filling
it with water and then I put nice red
hot rocks in the fire wait about an hour
until they get red
one and just fish them out with a couple
sticks this is always a pain but do your
best so these are red hot right now and
I can put them right into my bark bowl
and they're going to boil water
all right so I got a great little
vegetarian meal here this is all the
stinging nettle looks like spinach when
it's cooked up all the stingers are
totally gone so I can just eat that
there's a bunch of the ramps which I can
only take one little bite at a time
because our seriously young uni and
garlicky that makes a nice flavor to the
water um red clover a little flower
hedgy tomorrow is the first time I've
ever cooked them up and okay and you
know nice little vegetarian meal going
on here definitely gonna do fine energy
wise out here on plants I could probably
go you know forever on this amount of
plants in the springtime in eastern
North America there's so many plans all
right this is my first morning after
having the roof up everything went great
when the rain came down really isn't
much for drips or anything like that so
she's holding up really good for the
time I put in it was probably one of the
most worthwhile things I've done while
mounting yourself
frogs are amazing last night and I just
sat up and worked on some cordage so now
I'm just getting my day going eating
some cattail roots and I'll probably get
out my traps in about an hour so I would
just kind of let the night animals go to
bed and the day animals wake up and
hopefully in that interim they spring my
traps the fishings been working out good
but it'd be great to have a little bit
more protein
all right so fishing has been good and
using those little hooks that I made
there all day long in order to get fish
and because there's so many in here and
they're kind of trapped because a little
beaver dam and so what I've done is made
just a little maze where the fish are
funneled in from deep water and it's a
deep water trench coming right through
here and it exit right here where my
baits going to be where all the guts are
going to be that smell will attract them
into this pool here and hopefully some
of them are going to just get trapped in
here and swim around and not find our
way out as I made a little bit of a
narrow passage on the way out so I've
got a bunch of rocks is really doing the
trick bunch of sticks here to kind of
let the water flow this way and through
here so they think they haven't escaped
they can come kind of sense up to escape
is through this way and they'll stay in
this general pool without backtracking
their way out what I'm going to do now
is just tie up all these sticks again
with some bass wood bark and I could
just peel this off washi sticks together
so they make a nice tight fence and that
fence will allow them to think they have
an exit here when they really don't the
greatest thing about this type of trap
is when I do catch more fish than I can
eat if I leave them around my camp
they're going to get eaten by other
things that are going to rot what I can
do is just hold everything in here once
the fish get in here I can block it off
and this will be a little holding area
and this is your primitive refrigeration
nothing is going to rot in here they're
going to stay alive until I need them
and then I can just keep them in here
indefinitely
until I want them all right after the
fish trap I set up my trap line of
numerous deadfall traps for squirrels
and chipmunks
there's a bunch of those out there
hopefully one of them Springs rains
starting to come down again so I need to
do this one quick and I'm a camera out
too long but what I've done here is put
a strip down this piece of bark on the
standing tree I can't get this tree down
so I'm just going to strip it from the
tree and what I've done is just peel
back the bark I work my fingers in there
after hammering my knife in there a nice
slit
let's hop this bark off this becomes an
amazing basket so I've got this bark
here makes a really good basket and it's
going to be great for holding back all
the supplies that I get so they just
can't carry all this stuff anymore all
right so finally stopped raining I'm
gonna work on this basket so that when I
get out in the woods and I'm collecting
a bunch of stuff I can just throw it in
there it's getting really hard to carry
stinging nettles back in my hands so
having a basket in survival is really
handy
I've got some spare time to do that so
I'm going to try to crank out a really
quick bark basket I'm going to find the
center line and from that line and the
closest point there I'm going to draw
just a football shape so to ensure that
it's going to bend right on these marks
that I made I take a rock or a knife and
I carve away a whole bunch of the outer
bark just take your time slice down this
thing shouldn't be that difficult and
when I score right here then when I go
to bend it up later and the inner bark
is still remaining but the outer bark is
gone it's going to want to bend right on
the line that I've drawn
so what I'm going to do now is on this
kind of put some pressure here and I'm
going to pull the sides up it's going to
bend the weak spots the spots where I've
removed some of the outer bark and
hopefully the inner fiber doesn't break
and it holds up and it's going to make a
really nice wide basket then I just sew
it up with some bark real quick and it's
good to go
here's my supercool wilderness basket
because of the football shape on the
bottom it allows it to be wider than
just a piece of bark folded over flat
and I've got my 1 inch seam right here
running at the side so it overlaps a
little so I can actually drill holes up
the side and sew it together with some
hickory bark or whatever I've got lying
around all right so I could use my knife
but I actually prefer to make a little
drill out of some of the local rock I
don't have any great shirts or Flint's
out here obsidian or anything like that
so my next best thing is quartz and so
I'm just going to make a little drill
that I can make some holes into this
basket so I can sew it up I've got one
huge piece of quartz here and one
smaller one and I'm going to knock some
flakes off of either one and see if I
can just lash it in order to make some
sort of drill out of it to make the
holes and scoured some holes going up
and down the edges in my basket so I can
sew it up cool and I get just little
flakes like this off of there now this
quartz is extremely sharp and its really
you know hard stuff so it's going to
drill through the basket pretty well I
just need to get a good enough flake off
of maybe pressure flake it a little bit
with some bone but just anything that's
going to be a point I can lash to a
stick or just use and drill my way in
and make a bunch of holes in the basket
all right so I've got a lot of holes all
drilled in didn't actually take that
long
definitely less time than I thought it
was going to take and I quartz worked
out really well
got them all matched up on the inside
for the two layers and now I've got a
long piece of hickory bark that I'm just
going to sew it together with and I've
just fashioned an awl or a needle out of
a piece of wood and the Hickory barks
tied to that that way I can just insert
in the holes I can hopefully sew this
thing up quick
you
amazing I'm strong as hickory bark is
that's it got a killer basket two little
handles here that I can make a shoulder
strap on and can go collect ton of stuff
in this now now have to load my arms up
with all my stinging nettles and edible
plants and pieces of wood and bone and
everything else that I'm carrying so
pretty stoked on that alright so I'm
going to show you probably one of the
top five plants that you should know as
a survivalist this is cattail it's found
all over North America and you've seen
it before it's with these big sausage
like heads and have the ton of fibers at
the top of them when they die in the
fall and this plant is edible different
parts of it are Hannibal all year round
right now really good thing is the roots
of this plant a little you get down
there and pull them out they're loaded
with starches there's a good amount of
it it definitely doesn't taste great but
this is your absolute survival food if
you find a cattail swamp you can eat
this stuff all day long and that's all
you would ever need so well it's great
to have the fish and hopefully some
squirrels or something for my traps this
is the absolute go-to I could I could
survive solely on this because it's
loaded with starches where a lot of
those green leafy plants are so what I'm
going to do is grab hold these big
leaves dig down underneath until I find
the root and yank that out and that's
going to be a great edible plant so
Marcia areas our wins are found the
marshy or the better as far as digging
them out you don't want to find an oil
that's difficult to get to
be gentle with it really loosen the soil
when you do find the root work this out
of the ground there you go this whole
root here so it's a rhizome it's amazing
because it's just loaded with starches
and so cattail is going to be a great
plant
I can even peel back all these leaves
and on the inner part of all these
leaves is a little thing that's kind of
like maybe a celery or something like
that so I can break that off get to the
heart of it looks like a heart of palm
and you got to go real far in once you
get in a bit where it breaks off easily
it's not too stringy you can eat this
so that's really good try it out I do
like to cook these though because they
are underwater you never know you know
how much water has been touching them if
they're loaded with bacteria or not so
you know fair warning I'm probably going
to cook these up if nothing else dry out
the roots on a rock
and once they're fully dry they're also
going to be free of bacteria so I've got
a huge swamp here I'm going to spend the
solid day just running around grabbing
as many cattail roots as I can that's a
really good one
super good root the ends of these are
actually decently good compared to the
rest a little more flavor all right so
I'm out
checking my trapline right now and this
is the third trap in a row that I've
checked and the trap is sprung the bait
is gone and there's nothing under there
so I'm gonna reset these and hopefully
just make sure that baits on a little
bit better this time and that should
catch it it's a little bit frustrating
that the things getting my bait and
getting away you know a lot of times
trap lines don't work but not normally
when they're actually springing the trap
and getting the bait a lot of times they
just don't hit up the trap so it seems
like most everything to me is
functioning well so I'm not really sure
exactly what's going on here but um I'm
gonna set this up if the traps don't
work then I'm just going to go back to
to catching fish that was definitely a
great staple dammit dammit the same
thing kept happening to my entire
trapline unfortunately I couldn't view
my trail cameras until later to find out
the real culprit
all right the first problem I was having
was the red light on my emotion sensor
cameras in numerous videos the light
spooks the squirrels and they went
running just before they were about to
spring the trap and the real culprit was
this guy this raccoon would reach his
hand and steal the bait and set the trap
by the time the chipmunks and squirrels
would come through it was already sprung
next time I'm setting raccoon traps
fortunately the fish trap did score all
right so I got two in here right now
it's just pretty sweet I was really
hoping for more but I'm just happy at
work they're swimming around in there
it's pretty murky what I need to do now
is just splash them up on shore so I'm
gonna I didn't think this far ahead so
I'm gonna try to get in there scare them
out I can only see him every so often at
the right angle um there's this honey
right this is gonna be a problem anyway
I've sealed out the exit so I can do
this all day if I have to
alright I'm back in my trap and I got to
which isn't great but it's not too bad
the trick was getting them out of this
larger pool I chased him around for a
while that wasn't working and so what
I've done is I've pinned them off in
this smaller area kind of chased him in
here and piled up rocks so I hit him on
the head a little bit and so now I'm
gonna get in there come on alright so
I've got two really hot rocks down below
I might even try to sneak a third one in
there sneak that one in there alright so
now we got semi deep hole with a bunch
of really hot rocks in it so what I can
do now is chuck on a bunch of leaves and
make a nice little bed of leaves and
they're wet leaves and then dump some
water
these leaves don't ever have a chance to
light on fire even though they're wet
now I'm going to put my fish right on
top of those leaves okay what we're
doing is just creating a steamer now if
I wanted I could throw the garlic
mustard on top of this or something and
maybe some of the ramps and that would
flavor the fish with some onion right
now I'm just using maple leaves so now I
want to cover them again with as many
leaves as I can to protect them from
dirt and then I'm going to do is just
use a slab of bark
and cover the whole thing over with bark
to really make sure that the dirt
doesn't get in because I'm about to dump
a ton of dirt on top of this so what I'm
going to do seems a little crazy but
you're going to take all the dirt that
you dug out of the hole bury it over
that's going to trap all that heat in
your steam pit it's going to lock it in
create a perfect little steamer I remove
the dirt carefully and the fish in about
20 minutes to a half an hour are going
to be perfectly cooked
alright so I've had this the fish
hopefully cooking in here for about 20
minutes so far and as I peel this back I
can already feel the heat in the soil so
definitely was working I'm just going to
be gentle as I pull this dirt off
because you know I've had it before
where the dirt falls in a little too far
don't just keep those fish as clean as
possible so if this really works once I
pull this bark off hopefully there
should be some steam but I just want to
peel back all the dirt before I even do
that just and none falls in
oh ho ho oh it's hot in there I was a
little worried for a second that I might
not do it but that definitely is
overdoing it
and reach under the leaves lift this guy
out it's very well cooked but came out
pretty clean especially now I'm gonna
remove the skin on these guys and use it
for other stuff so I'm just a little
bass all right looking pretty good not
much meat on these guys but it's much
appreciated to have some meat out here
right now time went down pretty quickly
after this meal I spend the last evening
just enjoying my surroundings hanging
out on the beaver lodge and watching the
baby beaver survive until its mom chased
me away after a week like this
reentering society is always difficult
well everything didn't go perfect this
week in my opinion there's nothing close
to adding freedom to your life then the
empowerment you get from spending a week
in a survival situation if interested
come out in a class learn how to master
the art of survival register wild
survival skills calm where I've courses
in shelter water fire trapping bow
making basketry pottery edible medicinal
plants high tannin flint knapping and
survival excursions like this one in
numerous environments throughout the
world thanks for watching